TO MARIE LOUISE (SHEW).	 	
	  
	 	
  Not long ago, the writer of these lines,			
  In the mad pride of intellectuality,			
  Maintained "the power of words"--denied that ever	  
  A thought arose within the human brain 		
  Beyond the utterance of the human tongue:		 
  And now, as if in mockery of that boast,  	
  Two words--two foreign soft dissyllables--   
  Italian tones, made only to be murmured	 	
  By angels dreaming in the moonlit "dew	 	
  That hangs like chains of pearl on Hermon hill,"-- 		
  Have stirred from out the abysses of his heart,			
  Unthought-like thoughts that are the souls of thought,			
  Richer, far wilder, far diviner visions			
  Than even the seraph harper, Israfel, 	 
  (Who has "the sweetest voice of all God's creatures,")	  
  Could hope to utter. And I! my spells are broken.  	
  The pen falls powerless from my shivering hand. 		
  With thy dear name as text, though hidden by thee,  	
  I cannot write--I cannot speak or think-- 	 
  Alas, I cannot feel; for 'tis not feeling, 		
  This standing motionless upon the golden 	 
  Threshold of the wide-open gate of dreams,	  
  Gazing, entranced, adown the gorgeous vista,		 
  And thrilling as I see, upon the right,	 	
  Upon the left, and all the way along,   
  Amid empurpled vapors, far away	 	
  To where the prospect terminates--_thee only_!			
 		
			
	  
			
	 	
       *       *       *       *       *   
	 	
			
 		
			
		 
THE CITY IN THE SEA. 		
 		
	  
  Lo! Death has reared himself a throne		 
  In a strange city lying alone			
  Far down within the dim West,   
  Where the good and the bad and the worst and the best	 	
  Have gone to their eternal rest.		 
  There shrines and palaces and towers 		
  (Time-eaten towers and tremble not!)			
  Resemble nothing that is ours.	  
  Around, by lifting winds forgot,			
  Resignedly beneath the sky			
  The melancholy waters lie. 		
			
  No rays from the holy Heaven come down	  
  On the long night-time of that town; 	 
  But light from out the lurid sea			
  Streams up the turrets silently--  	
  Gleams up the pinnacles far and free--   
  Up domes--up spires--up kingly halls-- 	 
  Up fanes--up Babylon-like walls-- 	 
  Up shadowy long-forgotten bowers 	 
  Of sculptured ivy and stone flowers--	  
  Up many and many a marvellous shrine	  
  Whose wreathed friezes intertwine  	
  The viol, the violet, and the vine.   
		 
  Resignedly beneath the sky		 
  The melancholy waters lie.  	
  So blend the turrets and shadows there	 	
  That all seem pendulous in air,	  
  While from a proud tower in the town	  
  Death looks gigantically down.  	
   
  There open fanes and gaping graves	  
  Yawn level with the luminous waves; 		
  But not the riches there that lie 		
  In each idol's diamond eye--			
  Not the gaily-jewelled dead	  
  Tempt the waters from their bed;			
  For no ripples curl, alas!	 	
  Along that wilderness of glass--   
  No swellings tell that winds may be	 	
  Upon some far-off happier sea--			
  No heavings hint that winds have been 		
  On seas less hideously serene.			
	  
  But lo, a stir is in the air!	  
  The wave--there is a movement there!  	
  As if the towers had thrust aside,   
  In slightly sinking, the dull tide--	 	
  As if their tops had feebly given 	 
  A void within the filmy Heaven.  	
  The waves have now a redder glow--	 	
  The hours are breathing faint and low--		 
  And when, amid no earthly moans,			
  Down, down that town shall settle hence,			
  Hell, rising from a thousand thrones,   
  Shall do it reverence.		 
 	 
 		
1835? 	 
	  
			
  	
   
	 	
       *       *       *       *       * 	 
  	
	 	
	  
		 
	 	
THE SLEEPER	 	
			
		 
  At midnight, in the month of June, 	 
  I stand beneath the mystic moon. 		
  An opiate vapor, dewy, dim,	  
  Exhales from out her golden rim,	  
  And, softly dripping, drop by drop,  	
  Upon the quiet mountain top,  	
  Steals drowsily and musically		 
  Into the universal valley. 	 
  The rosemary nods upon the grave; 		
  The lily lolls upon the wave;		 
  Wrapping the fog about its breast,	  
  The ruin moulders into rest; 	 
  Looking like Lethe, see! the lake			
  A conscious slumber seems to take,  	
  And would not, for the world, awake. 		
  All Beauty sleeps!--and lo! where lies 	 
  (Her casement open to the skies) 	 
  Irene, with her Destinies!   
	  
  Oh, lady bright! can it be right--	  
  This window open to the night! 		
  The wanton airs, from the tree-top,	 	
  Laughingly through the lattice-drop--   
  The bodiless airs, a wizard rout,			
  Flit through thy chamber in and out, 		
  And wave the curtain canopy			
  So fitfully--so fearfully--		 
  Above the closed and fringed lid			
  'Neath which thy slumb'ring soul lies hid,			
  That, o'er the floor and down the wall, 		
  Like ghosts the shadows rise and fall!		 
  Oh, lady dear, hast thou no fear? 	 
  Why and what art thou dreaming here? 	 
  Sure thou art come o'er far-off seas,   
  A wonder to these garden trees!	  
  Strange is thy pallor! strange thy dress!	  
  Strange, above all, thy length of tress,	 	
  And this all-solemn silentness!  	
	 	
  The lady sleeps! Oh, may her sleep 		
  Which is enduring, so be deep! 		
  Heaven have her in its sacred keep!			
  This chamber changed for one more holy,	  
  This bed for one more melancholy,			
  I pray to God that she may lie	 	
  For ever with unopened eye,  	
  While the dim sheeted ghosts go by!  	
		 
  My love, she sleeps! Oh, may her sleep, 	 
  As it is lasting, so be deep;   
  Soft may the worms about her creep!	  
  Far in the forest, dim and old,	  
  For her may some tall vault unfold-- 		
  Some vault that oft hath flung its black  	
  And winged panels fluttering back,	 	
  Triumphant, o'er the crested palls, 		
  Of her grand family funerals-- 	 
  Some sepulchre, remote, alone, 		
  Against whose portal she hath thrown,		 
  In childhood many an idle stone--			
  Some tomb from out whose sounding door			
  She ne'er shall force an echo more,  	
  Thrilling to think, poor child of sin!			
  It was the dead who groaned within. 	 
 	 
  	
1845.	  
		 
			
	 	
			
		 
       *       *       *       *       * 		
 		
	  
	  
  	
	 	
BRIDAL BALLAD.			
		 
 	 
  The ring is on my hand,  	
    And the wreath is on my brow;	  
  Satins and jewels grand	  
  Are all at my command.  	
    And I am happy now.   
	 	
  And my lord he loves me well;			
    But, when first he breathed his vow, 		
  I felt my bosom swell--			
  For the words rang as a knell,	  
  And the voice seemed _his_ who fell 	 
  In the battle down the dell,			
    And who is happy now.  	
	 	
  But he spoke to reassure me, 	 
    And he kissed my pallid brow, 	 
  While a reverie came o'er me, 		
  And to the churchyard bore me,	  
  And I sighed to him before me,	  
  Thinking him dead D'Elormie,			
    "Oh, I am happy now!"	 	
			
  And thus the words were spoken,		 
    And thus the plighted vow, 		
  And, though my faith be broken,		 
  And, though my heart be broken,	  
  Behold the golden keys	  
    That _proves_ me happy now! 		
   
  Would to God I could awaken 		
    For I dream I know not how, 	 
  And my soul is sorely shaken 	 
  Lest an evil step be taken,--   
  Lest the dead who is forsaken	  
    May not be happy now.	  
 		
  	
1845.	 	
 		
 		
			
		 
	  
       *       *       *       *       *	 	
	 	
			
		 
  	
 		
NOTES.	  
	 	
			
1.   THE RAVEN  	
 		
 	 
"The Raven" was first published on the 29th January, 1845, in the New  	
York 'Evening Mirror'--a paper its author was then assistant editor of.	  
It was prefaced by the following words, understood to have been written		 
by N. P. Willis:			
			
  "We are permitted to copy (in advance of publication) from the second  	
  number of the 'American Review', the following remarkable poem by  	
  Edgar Poe. In our opinion, it is the most effective single example of 	 
  'fugitive poetry' ever published in this country, and unsurpassed in 		
  English poetry for subtle conception, masterly ingenuity of 	 
  versification, and consistent sustaining of imaginative lift and	  
  'pokerishness.' It is one of those 'dainties bred in a book' which we		 
  feed on. It will stick to the memory of everybody who reads it."	 	
   
In the February number of the 'American Review' the poem was published	 	
as by "Quarles," and it was introduced by the following note, evidently		 
suggested if not written by Poe himself. 	 
		 
  ["The following lines from a correspondent--besides the deep, quaint	  
  strain of the sentiment, and the curious introduction of some	  
  ludicrous touches amidst the serious and impressive, as was doubtless 		
  intended by the author--appears to us one of the most felicitous  	
  specimens of unique rhyming which has for some time met our eye. The	  
  resources of English rhythm for varieties of melody, measure, and 		
  sound, producing corresponding diversities of effect, have been 		
  thoroughly studied, much more perceived, by very few poets in the			
  language. While the classic tongues, especially the Greek, possess, by	  
  power of accent, several advantages for versification over our own,	 	
  chiefly through greater abundance of spondaic feet, we have other and	 	
  very great advantages of sound by the modern usage of rhyme.   
  Alliteration is nearly the only effect of that kind which the ancients		 
  had in common with us. It will be seen that much of the melody of 'The 		
  Raven' arises from alliteration and the studious use of similar sounds 		
  in unusual places. In regard to its measure, it may be noted that if			
  all the verses were like the second, they might properly be placed	  
  merely in short lines, producing a not uncommon form: but the presence 		
  in all the others of one line--mostly the second in the verse"  	
  (stanza?)--"which flows continuously, with only an aspirate pause in  	
  the middle, like that before the short line in the Sapphio Adonic,	 	
  while the fifth has at the middle pause no similarity of sound with 	 
  any part beside, gives the versification an entirely different effect. 	 
  We could wish the capacities of our noble language in prosody were  	
  better understood."	  
 		
  ED. 'Am. Rev.']  	
  	
 		
 	 
       *       *       *       *       *  	
 		
	  
	 	
2.   THE BELLS	 	
   
	  
The bibliographical history of "The Bells" is curious. The subject, and		 
some lines of the original version, having been suggested by the poet's 		
friend, Mrs. Shew, Poe, when he wrote out the first draft of the poem, 	 
headed it, "The Bells. By Mrs. M. A. Shew." This draft, now the editor's		 
property, consists of only seventeen lines, and reads thus:	  
			
	 	
			
I.		 
 		
      The bells!--ah the bells!		 
      The little silver bells!	  
  How fairy-like a melody there floats 		
          From their throats--  	
          From their merry little throats--	 	
          From the silver, tinkling throats			
    Of the bells, bells, bells--		 
            Of the bells! 	 
 		
II.	  
		 
      The bells!--ah, the bells!	 	
      The heavy iron bells!  	
  How horrible a monody there floats			
          From their throats-- 	 
          From their deep-toned throats-- 		
          From their melancholy throats 		
          How I shudder at the notes	  
    Of the bells, bells, bells--		 
            Of the bells!	 	
   
		 
		 
In the autumn of 1848 Poe added another line to this poem, and sent it  	
to the editor of the 'Union Magazine'. It was not published. So, in the	  
following February, the poet forwarded to the same periodical a much	  
enlarged and altered transcript. Three months having elapsed without	 	
publication, another revision of the poem, similar to the current			
version, was sent, and in the following October was published in the  	
'Union Magazine'. 		
 	 
  	
			
       *       *       *       *       *		 
			
			
   
3.   ULALUME	  
 	 
 	 
This poem was first published in Colton's 'American Review' for December		 
1847, as "To----Ulalume: a Ballad." Being reprinted immediately in	  
the 'Home Journal', it was copied into various publications with the	  
name of the editor, N. P. Willis, appended, and was ascribed to him.			
When first published, it contained the following additional stanza which  	
Poe subsequently, at the suggestion of Mrs. Whitman wisely suppressed:  	
			
 		
  Said we then--the two, then--"Ah, can it			
      Have been that the woodlandish ghouls--	  
      The pitiful, the merciful ghouls--			
  To bar up our path and to ban it 		
      From the secret that lies in these wolds--  	
  Had drawn up the spectre of a planet	 	
      From the limbo of lunary souls-- 		
  This sinfully scintillant planet 		
      From the Hell of the planetary souls?"			
	  
 		
			
       *       *       *       *       *   
		 
		 
 		
4.   TO HELEN 	 
	  
 		
"To Helen" (Mrs. S. Helen Whitman) was not published Until November  	
1848, although written several months earlier. It first appeared in the  	
'Union Magazine' and with the omission, contrary to the knowledge or	 	
desire of Poe, of the line, "Oh, God! oh, Heaven--how my heart beats in 	 
coupling those two words". 	 
  	
	  
 	 
       *       *       *       *       *			
	 	
   
			
5.   ANNABEL LEE 		
			
		 
"Annabel Lee" was written early in 1849, and is evidently an expression			
of the poet's undying love for his deceased bride although at least one			
of his lady admirers deemed it a response to her admiration. Poe sent a 	 
copy of the ballad to the 'Union Magazine', in which publication it	 	
appeared in January 1850, three months after the author's death. Whilst		 
suffering from "hope deferred" as to its fate, Poe presented a copy of 	 
"Annabel Lee" to the editor of the 'Southern Literary Messenger', who   
published it in the November number of his periodical, a month after		 
Poe's death. In the meantime the poet's own copy, left among his papers,			
passed into the hands of the person engaged to edit his works, and he			
quoted the poem in an obituary of Poe in the New York 'Tribune', before  	
any one else had an opportunity of publishing it.			
 	 
  	
 	 
       *       *       *       *       *	  
 	 
			
  	
6.   A VALENTINE 		
		 
 		
"A Valentine," one of three poems addressed to Mrs. Osgood, appears to 	 
have been written early in 1846.	  
	  
 		
   
       *       *       *       *       *	 	
		 
 	 
		 
7.   AN ENIGMA	  
			
  	
"An Enigma," addressed to Mrs. Sarah Anna Lewig ("Stella"), was sent to  	
that lady in a letter, in November 1847, and the following March			
appeared in Sartain's 'Union Magazine'. 	 
  	
 		
	  
*       *       *       *       *		 
	 	
	 	
			
8.   TO MY MOTHER		 
   
		 
The sonnet, "To My Mother" (Maria Clemm), was sent for publication to	  
the short-lived 'Flag of our Union', early in 1849, but does not appear	  
to have been issued until after its author's death, when it appeared in  	
the 'Leaflets of Memory' for 1850.   
	 	
 	 
  	
*       *       *       *       *	 	
	  
 		
  	
9.   FOR ANNIE  	
	 	
 	 
"For Annie" was first published in the 'Flag of our Union', in the 	 
spring of 1849. Poe, annoyed at some misprints in this issue, shortly 		
afterwards caused a corrected copy to be inserted in the 'Home Journal'.	  
		 
 		
	 	
*       *       *       *       *  	
			
 		
			
10.   TO F----	  
	  
	 	
"To F----" (Frances Sargeant Osgood) appeared in the 'Broadway Journal'  	
for April 1845. These lines are but slightly varied from those inscribed	 	
"To Mary," in the 'Southern Literary Messenger' for July 1835, and 	 
subsequently republished, with the two stanzas transposed, in 'Graham's 	 
Magazine' for March 1842, as "To One Departed."  	
	  
 	 
			
*       *       *       *       *  	
 		
 	 
 	 
11.   TO FRANCES S. OSGOOD   
	  
	  
"To F--s S. O--d," a portion of the poet's triune tribute to Mrs. 		
Osgood, was published in the 'Broadway Journal' for September 1845. The	 	
earliest version of these lines appeared in the 'Southern Literary			
Messenger' for September 1835, as "Lines written in an Album," and was		 
addressed to Eliza White, the proprietor's daughter. Slightly revised,  	
the poem reappeared in Burton's 'Gentleman's Magazine' for August, 1839, 		
as "To----."	  
	 	
			
  	
*       *       *       *       *	 	
 		
 		
			
12.   ELDORADO	  
 		
			
Although "Eldorado" was published during Poe's lifetime, in 1849, in the  	
'Flag of our Union', it does not appear to have ever received the			
author's finishing touches. 	 
  	
	  
	  
*       *       *       *       * 		
  	
	 	
			
13.   EULALIE		 
 		
	  
"Eulalie--a Song" first appears in Colton's 'American Review' for July,	  
1845.	  
  	
  	
	 	
*       *       *       *       *		 
 		
 	 
		 
14.   A DREAM WITHIN A DREAM			
			
  	
"A Dream within a Dream" does not appear to have been published as a  	
separate poem during its author's lifetime. A portion of it was 	 
contained, in 1829, in the piece beginning, "Should my early life seem," 	 
and in 1831 some few lines of it were used as a conclusion to		 
"Tamerlane." In 1849 the poet sent a friend all but the first nine lines		 
of the piece as a separate poem, headed "For Annie." 	 
 		
  	
	 	
*       *       *       *       * 		
   
		 
	  
15   TO MARIE LOUISE (SHEW)			
 		
  	
"To M----L----S----," addressed to Mrs. Marie Louise Shew, was written	 	
in February 1847, and published shortly afterwards. In the first			
posthumous collection of Poe's poems these lines were, for some reason,  	
included in the "Poems written in Youth," and amongst those poems they	 	
have hitherto been included.	  
	  
 		
   
*       *       *       *       *			
 		
   
		 
16.  (2)  TO MARIE LOUISE (SHEW)	  
	  
			
"To----," a second piece addressed to Mrs. Shew, and written in 1848,  	
was also first published, but in a somewhat faulty form, in the above 		
named posthumous collection. 	 
 		
  	
	  
*       *       *       *       * 	 
			
   
		 
17.   THE CITY IN THE SEA 	 
  	
		 
Under the title of "The Doomed City" the initial version of "The City in	  
the Sea" appeared in the 1831 volume of Poems by Poe: it reappeared as 	 
"The City of Sin," in the 'Southern Literary Messenger' for August 1835, 		
whilst the present draft of it first appeared in Colton's 'American  	
Review' for April, 1845.  	
 	 
 		
  	
*       *       *       *       *		 
			
			
  	
18.   THE SLEEPER			
 	 
  	
As "Irene," the earliest known version of "The Sleeper," appeared in the 		
1831 volume. It reappeared in the 'Literary Messenger' for May 1836,		 
and, in its present form, in the 'Broadway Journal' for May 1845.			
			
   
	 	
*       *       *       *       *		 
 	 
			
	  
19.   THE BRIDAL BALLAD		 
	 	
	 	
"The Bridal Ballad" is first discoverable in the 'Southern Literary			
Messenger' for January 1837, and, in its present compressed and revised		 
form, was reprinted in the 'Broadway Journal' for August, 1845. 		
 		
	  
	  
  	
  	
       *       *       *       *       *   
 	 
  	
	 	
		 
	  
                         POEMS OF MANHOOD. 		
 		
		 
			
  	
		 
       *       *       *       *       *	  
	  
			
   
	 	
		 
LENORE. 	 
  	
	  
  Ah, broken is the golden bowl! the spirit flown forever!	 	
  Let the bell toll!--a saintly soul floats on the Stygian river. 		
  And, Guy de Vere, hast _thou_ no tear?--weep now or never more!	  
  See! on yon drear and rigid bier low lies thy love, Lenore!		 
  Come! let the burial rite be read--the funeral song be sung!--		 
  An anthem for the queenliest dead that ever died so young--	  
  A dirge for her, the doubly dead in that she died so young.			
	  
  "Wretches! ye loved her for her wealth and hated her for her pride, 	 
  And when she fell in feeble health, ye blessed her--that she died!			
  How _shall_ the ritual, then, be read?--the requiem how be sung 	 
  By you--by yours, the evil eye,--by yours, the slanderous tongue 		
  That did to death the innocence that died, and died so young?"		 
		 
  _Peccavimus;_ but rave not thus! and let a Sabbath song  	
  Go up to God so solemnly the dead may feel no wrong!	  
  The sweet Lenore hath "gone before," with Hope, that flew beside, 	 
  Leaving thee wild for the dear child that should have been thy bride--			
  For her, the fair and _debonnaire_, that now so lowly lies, 		
  The life upon her yellow hair but not within her eyes--			
  The life still there, upon her hair--the death upon her eyes. 	 
		 
  "Avaunt! to-night my heart is light. No dirge will I upraise,	  
  But waft the angel on her flight with a paean of old days!	 	
  Let _no_ bell toll!--lest her sweet soul, amid its hallowed mirth,			
  Should catch the note, as it doth float up from the damned Earth.  	
  To friends above, from fiends below, the indignant ghost is riven--   
  From Hell unto a high estate far up within the Heaven--	  
  From grief and groan to a golden throne beside the King of Heaven." 		
  	
 	 
1844.	 	
		 
  	
 	 
	 	
		 
       *       *       *       *       *	 	
	  
		 
  	
	 	
 	 
TO ONE IN PARADISE,		 
		 
		 
  Thou wast that all to me, love,		 
    For which my soul did pine--	  
  A green isle in the sea, love, 	 
    A fountain and a shrine, 		
  All wreathed with fairy fruits and flowers, 		
  And all the flowers were mine.			
 		
  Ah, dream too bright to last!  	
    Ah, starry Hope! that didst arise		 
  But to be overcast!	  
    A voice from out the Future cries, 		
  "On! on!"--but o'er the Past  	
    (Dim gulf!) my spirit hovering lies  	
  Mute, motionless, aghast!		 
 	 
  For, alas! alas! with me 		
    The light of Life is o'er! 		
  "No more--no more--no more"--	  
  (Such language holds the solemn sea	 	
    To the sands upon the shore)	 	
  Shall bloom the thunder-blasted tree,  	
    Or the stricken eagle soar!		 
 	 
  And all my days are trances,   
    And all my nightly dreams	 	
  Are where thy dark eye glances,	 	
    And where thy footstep gleams-- 		
  In what ethereal dances,			
    By what eternal streams!	  
			
  Alas! for that accursed time 	 
    They bore thee o'er the billow, 	 
  From love to titled age and crime,  	
    And an unholy pillow!	  
  From me, and from our misty clime,		 
    Where weeps the silver willow! 		
  	
		 
1835			
  	
	 	
	 	
  	
			
       *       *       *       *       * 	 
	  
 		
  	
	  
	  
THE COLISEUM.			
 		
 		
  Type of the antique Rome! Rich reliquary 	 
  Of lofty contemplation left to Time			
  By buried centuries of pomp and power! 	 
  At length--at length--after so many days   
  Of weary pilgrimage and burning thirst,	  
  (Thirst for the springs of lore that in thee lie,)	  
  I kneel, an altered and an humble man,	 	
  Amid thy shadows, and so drink within  	
  My very soul thy grandeur, gloom, and glory!		 
		 
  Vastness! and Age! and Memories of Eld!  	
  Silence! and Desolation! and dim Night!	 	
  I feel ye now--I feel ye in your strength--	 	
  O spells more sure than e'er Judaean king	 	
  Taught in the gardens of Gethsemane!  	
  O charms more potent than the rapt Chaldee  	
  Ever drew down from out the quiet stars!	 	
		 
  Here, where a hero fell, a column falls!			
  Here, where the mimic eagle glared in gold,	  
  A midnight vigil holds the swarthy bat!	 	
  Here, where the dames of Rome their gilded hair 		
  Waved to the wind, now wave the reed and thistle!  	
  Here, where on golden throne the monarch lolled, 		
  Glides, spectre-like, unto his marble home, 	 
  Lit by the wan light of the horned moon,		 
  The swift and silent lizard of the stones!  	
   
  But stay! these walls--these ivy-clad arcades--		 
  These mouldering plinths--these sad and blackened shafts--  	
  These vague entablatures--this crumbling frieze--	 	
  These shattered cornices--this wreck--this ruin-- 	 
  These stones--alas! these gray stones--are they all-- 		
  All of the famed, and the colossal left 	 
  By the corrosive Hours to Fate and me?			
  	
  "Not all"--the Echoes answer me--"not all!		 
  Prophetic sounds and loud, arise forever 	 
  From us, and from all Ruin, unto the wise,  	
  As melody from Memnon to the Sun. 		
  We rule the hearts of mightiest men--we rule 		
  With a despotic sway all giant minds.		 
  We are not impotent--we pallid stones. 	 
  Not all our power is gone--not all our fame--  	
  Not all the magic of our high renown--	 	
  Not all the wonder that encircles us-- 	 
  Not all the mysteries that in us lie--  	
  Not all the memories that hang upon 	 
  And cling around about us as a garment,	  
  Clothing us in a robe of more than glory."		 
		 
			
1838.		 
  	
	 	
 		
 	 
 	 
       *       *       *       *       *	 	
  	
	  
	 	
 		
  	
THE HAUNTED PALACE.  	
		 
  	
  In the greenest of our valleys 	 
    By good angels tenanted,	  
  Once a fair and stately palace--		 
    Radiant palace--reared its head.			
  In the monarch Thought's dominion--  	
    It stood there!   
  Never seraph spread a pinion 	 
    Over fabric half so fair!			
 	 
  Banners yellow, glorious, golden,	 	
    On its roof did float and flow,	  
  (This--all this--was in the olden			
    Time long ago),	  
  And every gentle air that dallied,	  
    In that sweet day, 	 
  Along the ramparts plumed and pallid,		 
    A winged odor went away.	  
	 	
  Wanderers in that happy valley,	  
    Through two luminous windows, saw	 	
  Spirits moving musically,	  
    To a lute's well-tuned law, 		
  Bound about a throne where, sitting 		
    (Porphyrogene!)		 
  In state his glory well befitting,	 	
    The ruler of the realm was seen.	 	
		 
  And all with pearl and ruby glowing 		
    Was the fair palace door,	  
  Through which came flowing, flowing, flowing,	  
    And sparkling evermore, 	 
  A troop of Echoes, whose sweet duty 		
    Was but to sing,	 	
  In voices of surpassing beauty,		 
    The wit and wisdom of their king. 	 
 		
  But evil things, in robes of sorrow,	  
    Assailed the monarch's high estate.	  
  (Ah, let us mourn!--for never morrow 	 
    Shall dawn upon him desolate !) 		
  And round about his home the glory	 	
    That blushed and bloomed,	 	
  Is but a dim-remembered story	 	
    Of the old time entombed. 		
	  
  And travellers, now, within that valley,			
    Through the red-litten windows see		 
  Vast forms, that move fantastically  	
    To a discordant melody,	  
    While, like a ghastly rapid river,	  
    Through the pale door	 	
  A hideous throng rush out forever			
    And laugh--but smile no more.  	
   
		 
1838.		 
			
		 
 		
  	
   
       *       *       *       *       * 		
 	 
 		
  	
	 	
		 
THE CONQUEROR WORM.  	
   
	 	
  Lo! 'tis a gala night			
    Within the lonesome latter years!   
  An angel throng, bewinged, bedight		 
    In veils, and drowned in tears,	 	
  Sit in a theatre, to see 		
    A play of hopes and fears,  	
  While the orchestra breathes fitfully 		
    The music of the spheres. 		
 	 
  Mimes, in the form of God on high,	  
    Mutter and mumble low,		 
  And hither and thither fly--	  
    Mere puppets they, who come and go		 
  At bidding of vast formless things  	
    That shift the scenery to and fro,   
  Flapping from out their Condor wings		 
    Invisible Wo! 	 
 		
  That motley drama--oh, be sure		 
    It shall not be forgot!	  
  With its Phantom chased for evermore,	 	
    By a crowd that seize it not,			
  Through a circle that ever returneth in  	
    To the self-same spot,		 
  And much of Madness, and more of Sin,		 
    And Horror the soul of the plot.   
		 
  But see, amid the mimic rout	 	
    A crawling shape intrude! 		
  A blood-red thing that writhes from out  	
    The scenic solitude!  	
  It writhes!--it writhes!--with mortal pangs		 
    The mimes become its food,		 
  And the angels sob at vermin fangs	 	
    In human gore imbued. 		
	  
  Out--out are the lights--out all!  	
    And, over each quivering form, 		
  The curtain, a funeral pall,	  
    Comes down with the rush of a storm,	 	
  And the angels, all pallid and wan,		 
    Uprising, unveiling, affirm	 	
  That the play is the tragedy, "Man,"		 
    And its hero the Conqueror Worm.	 	
 	 
  	
1838 		
		 
			
  	
 	 
	 	
       *       *       *       *       *	  
 		
  	
	  
		 
  	
SILENCE.	  
		 
 		
  There are some qualities--some incorporate things, 		
    That have a double life, which thus is made   
  A type of that twin entity which springs 		
    From matter and light, evinced in solid and shade.		 
  There is a twofold _Silence_--sea and shore--		 
    Body and soul. One dwells in lonely places,	 	
    Newly with grass o'ergrown; some solemn graces,		 
  Some human memories and tearful lore, 	 
  Render him terrorless: his name's "No More." 		
  He is the corporate Silence: dread him not!  	
    No power hath he of evil in himself; 		
  But should some urgent fate (untimely lot!) 	 
    Bring thee to meet his shadow (nameless elf,   
  That haunteth the lone regions where hath trod	 	
  No foot of man), commend thyself to God!	 	
  	
 		
1840	  
 		
 	 
	  
		 
	  
       *       *       *       *       * 	 
	 	
	  
	  
 	 
  	
DREAMLAND.  	
		 
	  
  By a route obscure and lonely,  	
  Haunted by ill angels only,	  
  Where an Eidolon, named NIGHT, 		
  On a black throne reigns upright, 	 
  I have reached these lands but newly	  
  From an ultimate dim Thule--	 	
  From a wild weird clime that lieth, sublime,		 
    Out of SPACE--out of TIME. 	 
 		
  Bottomless vales and boundless floods, 		
  And chasms, and caves, and Titan woods,	 	
  With forms that no man can discover		 
  For the dews that drip all over;  	
  Mountains toppling evermore	 	
  Into seas without a shore;	  
  Seas that restlessly aspire,	  
  Surging, unto skies of fire;  	
  Lakes that endlessly outspread  	
  Their lone waters--lone and dead,	  
  Their still waters--still and chilly		 
  With the snows of the lolling lily.	  
			
  By the lakes that thus outspread	  
  Their lone waters, lone and dead,--	 	
  Their sad waters, sad and chilly  	
  With the snows of the lolling lily,-- 		
		 
  By the mountains--near the river 		
  Murmuring lowly, murmuring ever,--  	
  By the gray woods,--by the swamp	  
  Where the toad and the newt encamp,--	 	
  By the dismal tarns and pools 		
    Where dwell the Ghouls,--			
  By each spot the most unholy--	 	
  In each nook most melancholy,-- 	 
 	 
  There the traveller meets aghast			
  Sheeted Memories of the past--	  
  Shrouded forms that start and sigh		 
  As they pass the wanderer by-- 		
  White-robed forms of friends long given,			
  In agony, to the Earth--and Heaven. 		
	 	 	   		  	 	 	  		   		  	 		 	  	 				  	  			 		 	 		  	 		 	 					 	 		  	 	  	   		 		 		 	 		    		 	 					 		  	 			  	 		 	 	 	   	 					 	   			 	  		   	 		  			 		  			   	 			    	 		 	  		 	 		  			 				 		 					 		    	 				 	 	