But there is still one more point to be considered. We have not yet	 	
allowed for the fact that with any given arrangement three of the other	  
arrangements may be obtained by simply turning the chain over through	 	
its entire length and by reversing the ends. Thus C is really the same			
as A, and if we turn this page upside down, then A and C give two other			
arrangements that are still really identical. Thus to get the correct	  
answer to the puzzle we must divide our last total by 4, when we find  	
that there are just 72,253,440 different ways in which the smith might   
have put those links together. In other words, if the nine links had			
originally formed a piece of chain, and it was known that the two 	 
circular links were separated, then it would be 72,253,439 chances to 1	  
that the smith would not have put the links together again precisely as 		
they were arranged before!	 	
			
			
283.--THE FIFTEEN DOMINOES.			
 	 
The reader may have noticed that at each end of the line I give is a	  
four, so that, if we like, we can form a ring instead of a line. It can  	
easily be proved that this must always be so. Every line arrangement 		
will make a circular arrangement if we like to join the ends. Now,   
curious as it may at first appear, the following diagram exactly 	 
represents the conditions when we leave the doubles out of the question  	
and devote our attention to forming circular arrangements. Each number, 	 
or half domino, is in line with every other number, so that if we start	  
at any one of the five numbers and go over all the lines of the pentagon 		
once and once only we shall come back to the starting place, and the 		
order of our route will give us one of the circular arrangements for the	 	
ten dominoes. Take your pencil and follow out the following route,			
starting at the 4: 41304210234. You have been over all the lines once		 
only, and by repeating all these figures in this way,  	
41--13--30--04--42--21--10--02--23--34, you get an arrangement of the			
dominoes (without the doubles) which will be perfectly clear. Take other	  
routes and you will get other arrangements. If, therefore, we can	  
ascertain just how many of these circular routes are obtainable from			
the pentagon, then the rest is very easy.  	
			
Well, the number of different circular routes over the pentagon is 264. 	 
How I arrive at these figures I will not at present explain, because it 	 
would take a lot of space. The dominoes may, therefore, be arranged in a  	
circle in just 264 different ways, leaving out the doubles. Now, in any	  
one of these circles the five doubles may be inserted in 2^5 = 32 		
different ways. Therefore when we include the doubles there are 264 x 32  	
= 8,448 different circular arrangements. But each of those circles may	 	
be broken (so as to form our straight line) in any one of 15 different			
places. Consequently, 8,448 x 15 gives 126,720 different ways as the		 
correct answer to the puzzle. 	 
			
[Illustration:	  
			
                -----	 	
               |     |   
            /  |     |  \	  
           /    -----    \		 
          /     .  .      \ 		
     -----     .    .       ----- 	 
    |     |   .      .     | o o |		 
    |  o  | -.--------.--- |     |			
    |     | .          . . | o o |			
     ----- .  .        ..   -----  	
        \ .     .    .   .  /		 
       -----      ..     -----		 
      |  o  |    .  .   |o    | 		
      |     | --------- |  o  | 	 
      |  o  |.         .|    o|	  
       -----             -----		 
	 	
]  	
   
I purposely refrained from asking the reader to discover in just how			
many different ways the full set of twenty-eight dominoes may be 		
arranged in a straight line in accordance with the ordinary rules of the			
game, left to right and right to left of any arrangement counting as	  
different ways. It is an exceedingly difficult problem, but the correct 		
answer is 7,959,229,931,520 ways. The method of solving is very complex.  	
  	
	 	
284.--THE CROSS TARGET. 	 
  	
[Illustration: 		
		 
             --  --			
            (CD)(  )			
             --  --  	
            (AE)(A ) 		
     --  --  --  --  --  -- 	 
    (CE)(E )(A )(AB)(C )(D ) 	 
     --  --  --  --  --  --  	
    (D )(  )(B )(E )(EB)(  )	  
     --  --  --  --  --  -- 	 
            (C )(B )			
             --  --  	
            (  )(ED)   
             --  -- 		
 		
			
]	  
	  
Twenty-one different squares may be selected. Of these nine will be of	 	
the size shown by the four A's in the diagram, four of the size shown by  	
the B's, four of the size shown by the C's, two of the size shown by the   
D's, and two of the size indicated by the upper single A, the upper 	 
single E, the lower single C, and the EB. It is an interesting fact that  	
you cannot form any one of these twenty-one squares without using at 		
least one of the six circles marked E.	  
	 	
	 	
285.--THE FOUR POSTAGE STAMPS.  	
   
Referring to the original diagram, the four stamps may be given in the 	 
shape 1, 2, 3, 4, in three ways; in the shape 1, 2, 5, 6, in six ways; 	 
in the shape 1, 2, 3, 5, or 1, 2, 3, 7, or 1, 5, 6, 7, or 3, 5, 6, 7, in  	
twenty-eight ways; in shape 1, 2, 3, 6, or 2, 5, 6, 7, in fourteen ways;		 
in shape 1, 2, 6, 7, or 2, 3, 5, 6, or 1, 5, 6, 10, or 2, 5, 6, 9, in			
fourteen ways. Thus there are sixty-five ways in all.			
	 	
  	
286.--PAINTING THE DIE. 		
 		
The 1 can be marked on any one of six different sides. For every side			
occupied by 1 we have a selection of four sides for the 2. For every	 	
situation of the 2 we have two places for the 3. (The 6, 5, and 4 need	  
not be considered, as their positions are determined by the 1, 2, and	 	
3.) Therefore 6, 4, and 2 multiplied together make 48 different  	
ways--the correct answer.	 	
 	 
 	 
287.--AN ACROSTIC PUZZLE. 	 
	  
There are twenty-six letters in the alphabet, giving 325 different			
pairs. Every one of these pairs may be reversed, making 650 ways. But 		
every initial letter may be repeated as the final, producing 26 other  	
ways. The total is therefore 676 different pairs. In other words, the	 	
answer is the square of the number of letters in the alphabet. 	 
  	
	 	
288.--CHEQUERED BOARD DIVISIONS.		 
			
There are 255 different ways of cutting the board into two pieces of			
exactly the same size and shape. Every way must involve one of the five  	
cuts shown in Diagrams A, B, C, D, and E. To avoid repetitions by   
reversal and reflection, we need only consider cuts that enter at the		 
points a, b, and c. But the exit must always be at a point in a straight  	
line from the entry through the centre. This is the most important 	 
condition to remember. In case B you cannot enter at a, or you will get	  
the cut provided for in E. Similarly in C or D, you must not enter the	  
key-line in the same direction as itself, or you will get A or B. If you	 	
are working on A or C and entering at a, you must consider joins at one  	
end only of the key-line, or you will get repetitions. In other cases		 
you must consider joins at both ends of the key; but after leaving a in		 
case D, turn always either to right or left--use one direction only. 		
Figs. 1 and 2 are examples under A; 3 and 4 are examples under B; 5 and 	 
6 come under C;	  
 		
[Illustration] 		
	 	
and 7 is a pretty example of D. Of course, E is a peculiar type, and			
obviously admits of only one way of cutting, for you clearly cannot			
enter at b or c.  	
	  
Here is a table of the results:--		 
  	
	 	
         a    b    c   Ways.	  
    A =  8 + 17 + 21 =  46		 
    B =  0 + 17 + 21 =  38			
    C = 15 + 31 + 39 =  85 		
    D = 17 + 29 + 39 =  85			
    E =  1 +  0 +  0 =   1	  
        --   --   --   ---	 	
        41  94   120   255	 	
   
I have not attempted the task of enumerating the ways of dividing a		 
board 8 x 8--that is, an ordinary chessboard. Whatever the method 		
adopted, the solution would entail considerable labour. 		
			
	  
289.--LIONS AND CROWNS. 		
 		
[Illustration]  	
	 	
Here is the solution. It will be seen that each of the four pieces 	 
(after making the cuts along the thick lines) is of exactly the same 		
size and shape, and that each piece contains a lion and a crown. Two of		 
the pieces are shaded so as to make the solution quite clear to the eye.	  
		 
			
290.--BOARDS WITH AN ODD NUMBER OF SQUARES.   
 		
There are fifteen different ways of cutting the 5 x 5 board (with the 		
central square removed) into two pieces of the same size and shape. 		
Limitations of space will not allow me to give diagrams of all these,			
but I will enable the reader to draw them all out for himself without	  
the slightest difficulty. At whatever point on the edge your cut enters, 	 
it must always end at a point on the edge, exactly opposite in a line			
through the centre of the square. Thus, if you enter at point 1 (see  	
Fig. 1) at the top, you must leave at point 1 at the bottom. Now, 1 and   
2 are the only two really different points of entry; if we use any 		
others they will simply produce similar solutions. The directions of the 		
cuts in the following fifteen			
	  
[Illustration: Fig. 1. Fig. 2.]			
  	
solutions are indicated by the numbers on the diagram. The duplication  	
of the numbers can lead to no confusion, since every successive number			
is contiguous to the previous one. But whichever direction you take from 	 
the top downwards you must repeat from the bottom upwards, one direction  	
being an exact reflection of the other.	 	
	  
    1, 4, 8. 		
    1, 4, 3, 7, 8. 		
    1, 4, 3, 7, 10, 9.   
    1, 4, 3, 7, 10, 6, 5, 9. 		
    1, 4, 5, 9. 		
    1, 4, 5, 6, 10, 9. 		
    1, 4, 5, 6, 10, 7, 8.			
    2, 3, 4, 8.	  
    2, 3, 4, 5, 9.	  
    2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 9.  	
    2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 7, 8.   
    2, 3, 7, 8.	 	
    2, 3, 7, 10, 9. 	 
    2, 3, 7, 10, 6, 5, 9.  	
    2, 3, 7, 10, 6, 5, 4, 8. 		
		 
It will be seen that the fourth direction (1, 4, 3, 7, 10, 6, 5, 9)			
produces the solution shown in Fig. 2. The thirteenth produces the			
solution given in propounding the puzzle, where the cut entered at the  	
side instead of at the top. The pieces, however, will be of the same 		
shape if turned over, which, as it was stated in the conditions, would		 
not constitute a different solution. 	 
		 
	  
291.--THE GRAND LAMA'S PROBLEM. 		
  	
The method of dividing the chessboard so that each of the four parts	 	
shall be of exactly the same size and shape, and contain one of the			
gems, is shown in the diagram. The method of shading the squares is		 
adopted to make the shape of the pieces clear to the eye. Two of the  	
pieces are shaded and two left white. 		
	  
The reader may find it interesting to compare this puzzle with that of			
the "Weaver" (No. 14, _Canterbury Puzzles_).	 	
   
[Illustration: THE GRAND LAMA'S PROBLEM.		 
 	 
    +===+===+===+===+===+===+===+===+ 	 
    |:o:|   :   :   :   :   :   :   :	  
    I...I...+===+===+===+===+===+===+	  
    |:::| o |:::::::::::::::::::::::|	 	
    I...I...I...+===+===+===+===+...I	 	
    |:::|   |:o:|   :   :   :   |:::|  	
    I...I...I...I...I===+===+...I...I   
    |:::|   |:::| o |:::::::|   |:::|		 
    I...I...I...+===I===+...I...I...I 		
    |:::|   |:::::::|   |:::|   |:::|   
    I...I...+===+===+...+...I...I...I		 
    |:::|   :   :   :   |:::|   |:::|	  
    I...+===+===+===+===I...I...I...I			
    |:::::::::::::::::::::::|   |:::|	 	
    +===+===+===+===+===+===+...I...I			
    |   :   :   :   :   :   :   |:::|		 
    +===+===+===+===+===+===+===+===+ 		
		 
]	  
	  
 		
292.--THE ABBOT'S WINDOW.  	
	 	
THE man who was "learned in strange mysteries" pointed out to Father			
John that the orders of the Lord Abbot of St. Edmondsbury might be 		
easily carried out by blocking up twelve of the lights in the window as			
shown by the dark squares in the following sketch:--	  
	 	
	 	
[Illustration:  	
   
    +===+===+===+===+===+===+===+===+			
    |   :   :   :   :   :   :   :   | 		
    I...+===+...+...+...+...+===+...I			
    |   IIIII   :   :   :   IIIII   |		 
    I...+===+===+...+...+===+===+...I 		
    |   :   IIIII   :   IIIII   :   | 		
    I...+...+===+===+===+===+...+...I	 	
    |   :   :   IIIIIIIII   :   :   |			
    I...+...+...+===+===+...+...+...I		 
    |   :   :   IIIIIIIII   :   :   |  	
    I...+...+===+===+===+===+...+...I   
    |   :   IIIII   :   IIIII   :   |	  
    I...+===+===+...+...+===+===+...I		 
    |   IIIII   :   :   :   IIIII   |	 	
    I...+===+...+...+...+...+===+...I  	
    |   :   :   :   :   :   :   :   |	 	
    +===+===+===+===+===+===+===+===+ 	 
 	 
]	  
	  
Father John held that the four corners should also be darkened, but the 		
sage explained that it was desired to obstruct no more light than was  	
absolutely necessary, and he said, anticipating Lord Dundreary, "A	 	
single pane can no more be in a _line_ with itself than one bird can go			
into a corner and flock in solitude. The Abbot's condition was that no		 
diagonal _lines_ should contain an odd number of lights."  	
 		
Now, when the holy man saw what had been done he was well pleased, and	  
said, "Truly, Father John, thou art a man of deep wisdom, in that thou	 	
hast done that which seemed impossible, and yet withal adorned our	 	
window with a device of the cross of St. Andrew, whose name I received  	
from my godfathers and godmothers." Thereafter he slept well and arose  	
refreshed. The window might be seen intact to-day in the monastery of 	 
St. Edmondsbury, if it existed, which, alas! the window does not. 		
 	 
		 
293.--THE CHINESE CHESSBOARD.			
			
    +===I===+===+===+===I===+===+===+   
    |   |:::: 2 ::::| 3 |:::| 5 |:6:|	 	
    I...+===+...+===+...I...I...+===I		 
    |:::: 1 |:::|   ::::| 4 |:::| 7 | 	 
    I...+===+===+...I===I...I===+===I			
    |   |::::   |:::|   ::::| 9 |:::|	  
    I===I...I===============I...I...I		 
    |:::: 11|::::   ::::: 10|:::| 8 |	 	
    I=======I===I===========I...I...I	 	
    |   ::::: 12|:::: 13::::|   |:::|			
    I=======+...I...+===+===|===+===I		 
    |:::: 14|:::|   |:::| 16::::| 17|  	
    I...+...I===I===+...+...+===+...I   
    |   ::::|   ::::: 15|:::|   ::::|	  
    I=======+===========+===+=======I	 	
    |::::   ::::: 18:::::   :::::   |	 	
    +===+===+===+===+===+===+===+===+  	
   
    +===+===I===I===+===I===+===+===+		 
    |   ::::|   |::::   |:::|   ::::| 		
    I...+===I...I=======I...I===+...I 		
    |:::|   |::::   |::::   |:::|   |	  
    I...I===I===============I===I...I	  
    |   |::::   ::::|   :::::   |:::|  	
    I===I=======I=======I=======I===I   
    |:::|   ::::|   ::::|   ::::|   |	  
    I...I===+...I...+...I...+===+...I 		
    |   ::::|   |::::   |:::|   ::::| 		
    I...+===I...+===I===+...I===+...I			
    |:::|   |::::   |::::   |:::|   |	  
    I===I...+=======I=======+...I===I	  
    |   |::::   ::::|   :::::   |:::|  	
    I...+=======+...I...+=======+...I  	
    |::::   ::::|   |:::|   :::::   |	  
    +===+===+===+===+===+===+===+===+			
 		
			
Eighteen is the maximum number of pieces. I give two solutions. The	  
numbered diagram is so cut that the eighteenth piece has the largest	  
area--eight squares--that is possible under the conditions. The second  	
diagram was prepared under the added condition that no piece should   
contain more than five squares.			
		 
No. 74 in _The Canterbury Puzzles_ shows how to cut the board into  	
twelve pieces, all different, each containing five squares, with one			
square piece of four squares.	  
	  
  	
294.--THE CHESSBOARD SENTENCE.   
		 
    +===I===I===I===I=======I=======+		 
    |   |:::|   |:::|   ::::|   ::::|  	
    I===I...I===I...I...+===I...+===I 		
    |:::|   :::::   |:::|   :::::   |	  
    |...|...+===I...I...+===+...+===I 	 
    |   |:::|   |:::|   ::::|   ::::|	 	
    |...+===+...+===I===I===I=======I  	
    |::::   :::::   |:::|   :::::   |   
    I===========I===I...I===I===+...|		 
    |   :::::   |:::|   |:::|   |:::| 	 
    |...+===+...|...|...|...I===+...|		 
    |:::|   |:::|   |:::|   |::::   |	  
    |...|...|...|...I===+...+===+...| 	 
    |   |:::|   |:::|   :::::   |:::|			
    I===+...+===I...+=======I===+...|   
    |::::   ::::|   :::::   |::::   | 		
    +===========I===================+ 		
 		
The pieces may be fitted together, as shown in the illustration, to form			
a perfect chessboard.	  
 	 
  	
295.--THE EIGHT ROOKS.  	
 		
Obviously there must be a rook in every row and every column. Starting 	 
with the top row, it is clear that we may put our first rook on any one 	 
of eight different squares. Wherever it is placed, we have the option of 		
seven squares for the second rook in the second row. Then we have six	  
squares from which to select the third row, five in the fourth, and so	  
on. Therefore the number of our different ways must be 8 x 7 x 6 x 5 x 4			
x 3 x 2 x 1 = 40,320 (that is 8!), which is the correct answer.	 	
			
How many ways there are if mere reversals and reflections are not		 
counted as different has not yet been determined; it is a difficult 		
problem. But this point, on a smaller square, is considered in the next	 	
puzzle.	  
		 
	 	
296.--THE FOUR LIONS.	 	
			
		 
There are only seven different ways under the conditions. They are as 	 
follows: 1 2 3 4, 1 2 4 3, 1 3 2 4, 1 3 4 2, 1 4 3 2, 2 1 4 3, 2 4 1 3.   
Taking the last example, this notation means that we place a lion in the	  
second square of first row, fourth square of second row, first square of 		
third row, and third square of fourth row. The first example is, of			
course, the one we gave when setting the puzzle.  	
	 	
 	 
297.--BISHOPS--UNGUARDED. 	 
  	
    +...+...+...+...+...+...+...+...+		 
    :   :::::   :::::   :::::   :::::	  
    +...+...+...+...+...+...+...+...+ 		
    :::::   :::::   :::::   :::::   :	 	
    +...+...+...+...+...+...+...+...+			
    :   :::::   :::::   :::::   :::::			
    +...+...+...+...+...+...+...+...+ 		
    ::B:: B ::B:: B ::B:: B ::B:: B :			
    +...+...+...+...+...+...+...+...+	 	
    :   :::::   :::::   :::::   :::::	 	
    +...+...+...+...+...+...+...+...+	 	
    :::::   :::::   :::::   :::::   :  	
    +...+...+...+...+...+...+...+...+	  
    :::::   :::::   :::::   :::::   :			
    +...+...+...+...+...+...+...+...+ 		
    :   :::::   :::::   :::::   :::::			
    +...+...+...+...+...+...+...+...+	  
	 	
	 	
This cannot be done with fewer bishops than eight, and the simplest   
solution is to place the bishops in line along the fourth or fifth row	 	
of the board (see diagram). But it will be noticed that no bishop is			
here guarded by another, so we consider that point in the next puzzle. 		
			
	  
298.--BISHOPS--GUARDED.	 	
	 	
    +...+...+...+...+.......+.......+   
    :   :::::   :::::   :::::   :::::		 
    +...+...+...+...+...+...+...+...+ 		
    :::::   :::::   :::::   :::::   : 		
    +...+...+...+...+...+...+...+...+			
    :   :::::   :::::   :::::   :::::	  
    +...+...+...+...+...+...+.......+	  
    ::::: B ::B:: B ::::: B ::B::   : 		
    +...........+...+...+...+...+...+  	
    :   ::B:: B ::B::   ::B:: B :::::	 	
    +...+...+...+...+...+...+...+...+ 	 
    :::::   :::::   :::::   :::::   : 		
    +...+...+...+...+...+...+...+...+	  
    :   :::::   :::::   :::::   :::::	  
    +...+...+...+...+.......+...+...+		 
    :::::   :::::   :::::   :::::   :	 	
    +...+...+...+...+.......+...+...+   
		 
This puzzle is quite easy if you first of all give it a little thought. 	 
You need only consider squares of one colour, for whatever can be done  	
in the case of the white squares can always be repeated on the black,	  
and they are here quite independent of one another. This equality, of	  
course, is in consequence of the fact that the number of squares on an			
ordinary chessboard, sixty-four, is an even number. If a square	 	
chequered board has an odd number of squares, then there will always be   
one more square of one colour than of the other.		 
		 
Ten bishops are necessary in order that every square shall be attacked   
and every bishop guarded by another bishop. I give one way of arranging		 
them in the diagram. It will be noticed that the two central bishops in		 
the group of six on the left-hand side of the board serve no purpose,			
except to protect those bishops that are on adjoining squares. Another			
solution would therefore be obtained by simply raising the upper one of   
these one square and placing the other a square lower down.	 	
		 
 	 
299.--BISHOPS IN CONVOCATION.   
		 
The fourteen bishops may be placed in 256 different ways. But every			
bishop must always be placed on one of the sides of the board--that			
is, somewhere on a row or file on the extreme edge. The puzzle,  	
therefore, consists in counting the number of different ways that we			
can arrange the fourteen round the edge of the board without attack. 	 
This is not a difficult matter. On a chessboard of n squared squares 2n - 2 		
bishops (the maximum number) may always be placed in 2^n ways without	 	
attacking. On an ordinary chessboard n would be 8; therefore 14	  
bishops may be placed in 256 different ways. It is rather curious that	  
the general result should come out in so simple a form.  	
   
[Illustration]		 
		 
  	
300.--THE EIGHT QUEENS. 		
		 
[Illustration]			
			
The solution to this puzzle is shown in the diagram. It will be found   
that no queen attacks another, and also that no three queens are in a	 	
straight line in any oblique direction. This is the only arrangement out		 
of the twelve fundamentally different ways of placing eight queens 	 
without attack that fulfils the last condition.			
	  
		 
301.--THE EIGHT STARS.	 	
	 	
The solution of this puzzle is shown in the first diagram. It is the			
only possible solution within the conditions stated. But if one of the		 
eight stars had not already been placed as shown, there would then have 		
been eight ways of arranging the stars according to this scheme, if we		 
count reversals and reflections as different. If you turn this page	  
round so that each side is in turn at the bottom, you will get the four			
reversals; and if you reflect each of these in a mirror, you will get  	
the four reflections. These are, therefore, merely eight aspects of one   
"fundamental solution." But without that first star being so placed,	 	
there is another fundamental solution, as shown in the second diagram.		 
But this arrangement being in a way symmetrical, only produces four 	 
different aspects by reversal and reflection.		 
	  
[Illustration]	  
  	
  	
302.--A PROBLEM IN MOSAICS.   
			
[Illustration] 	 
 		
The diagram shows how the tiles may be rearranged. As before, one yellow		 
and one purple tile are dispensed with. I will here point out that in			
the previous arrangement the yellow and purple tiles in the seventh row			
might have changed places, but no other arrangement was possible.   
	 	
		 
303.--UNDER THE VEIL. 	 
			
Some schemes give more diagonal readings of four letters than others,	  
and we are at first tempted to favour these; but this is a false scent,		 
because what you appear to gain in this direction you lose in others. Of	 	
course it immediately occurs to the solver that every LIVE or EVIL is	 	
worth twice as much as any other word, since it reads both ways and			
always counts as 2. This is an important consideration, though sometimes		 
those arrangements that contain most readings of these two words are 		
fruitless in other words, and we lose in the general count.		 
	  
[Illustration: 	 
	 	
     _ _ I V E L _ _   
     E V L _ _ I _ _	 	
     L _ _ I _ _ V E		 
     I _ V E _ _ _ L 	 
     _ E _ _ L V _ I			
     _ L I _ _ I _ E V	  
    /V _ E L _ _ I _		 
    _ I _ _ V E L _\	 	
  	
]   
		 
The above diagram is in accordance with the conditions requiring no  	
letter to be in line with another similar letter, and it gives twenty 		
readings of the five words--six horizontally, six vertically, four in	  
the diagonals indicated by the arrows on the left, and four in the	 	
diagonals indicated by the arrows on the right. This is the maximum.	 	
  	
Four sets of eight letters may be placed on the board of sixty-four		 
squares in as many as 604 different ways, without any letter ever being 	 
in line with a similar one. This does not count reversals and 		
reflections as different, and it does not take into consideration the		 
actual permutations of the letters among themselves; that is, for	  
example, making the L's change places with the E's. Now it is a singular 	 
fact that not only do the twenty word-readings that I have given prove			
to be the real maximum, but there is actually only that one arrangement  	
from which this maximum may be obtained. But if you make the V's change 		
places with the I's, and the L's with the E's, in the solution given, 	 
you still get twenty readings--the same number as before in every 	 
direction. Therefore there are two ways of getting the maximum from the   
same arrangement. The minimum number of readings is zero--that is, the	  
letters can be so arranged that no word can be read in any of the	  
directions. 		
	 	
			
304.--BACHET'S SQUARE.		 
 		
[Illustration: 1]	  
	  
[Illustration: 2]	  
  	
[Illustration: 3]  	
	 	
[Illustration: 4]		 
 		
Let us use the letters A, K, Q, J, to denote ace, king, queen, jack; and 	 
D, S, H, C, to denote diamonds, spades, hearts, clubs. In Diagrams 1		 
and 2 we have the two available ways of arranging either group of			
letters so that no two similar letters shall be in line--though a			
quarter-turn of 1 will give us the arrangement in 2. If we superimpose   
or combine these two squares, we get the arrangement of Diagram 3, which	 	
is one solution. But in each square we may put the letters in the top		 
line in twenty-four different ways without altering the scheme of 	 
arrangement. Thus, in Diagram 4 the S's are similarly placed to the D's   
in 2, the H's to the S's, the C's to the H's, and the D's to the C's. It		 
clearly follows that there must be 24x24 = 576 ways of combining the two			
primitive arrangements. But the error that Labosne fell into was that of			
assuming that the A, K, Q, J must be arranged in the form 1, and the D,   
S, H, C in the form 2. He thus included reflections and half-turns, but	 	
not quarter-turns. They may obviously be interchanged. So that the 	 
correct answer is 2 x 576 = 1,152, counting reflections and reversals as  	
different. Put in another manner, the pairs in the top row may be	  
written in 16 x 9 x 4 x 1 = 576 different ways, and the square then	  
completed in 2 ways, making 1,152 ways in all.		 
	 	
	 	
305.--THE THIRTY-SIX LETTER BLOCKS.			
		 
I pointed out that it was impossible to get all the letters into the box 	 
under the conditions, but the puzzle was to place as many as possible.		 
	  
This requires a little judgment and careful investigation, or we are 		
liable to jump to the hasty conclusion that the proper way to solve the  	
puzzle must be first to place all six of one letter, then all six of	 	
another letter, and so on. As there is only one scheme (with its			
reversals) for placing six similar letters so that no two shall be in a		 
line in any direction, the reader will find that after he has placed  	
four different kinds of letters, six times each, every place is occupied	  
except those twelve that form the two long diagonals. He is, therefore,		 
unable to place more than two each of his last two letters, and there 	 
are eight blanks left. I give such an arrangement in Diagram 1.			
  	
[Illustration: 1]			
 		
[Illustration: 2]   
			
The secret, however, consists in not trying thus to place all six of	  
each letter. It will be found that if we content ourselves with placing  	
only five of each letter, this number (thirty in all) may be got into 		
the box, and there will be only six blanks. But the correct solution is   
to place six of each of two letters and five of each of the remaining	  
four. An examination of Diagram 2 will show that there are six each of C 	 
and D, and five each of A, B, E, and F. There are, therefore, only four 		
blanks left, and no letter is in line with a similar letter in any	 	
direction.		 
 		
 		
306.--THE CROWDED CHESSBOARD.   
		 
[Illustration] 	 
  	
Here is the solution. Only 8 queens or 8 rooks can be placed on the  	
board without attack, while the greatest number of bishops is 14, and of	  
knights 32. But as all these knights must be placed on squares of the	 	
same colour, while the queens occupy four of each colour and the bishops  	
7 of each colour, it follows that only 21 knights can be placed on the  	
same colour in this puzzle. More than 21 knights can be placed alone on   
the board if we use both colours, but I have not succeeded in placing			
more than 21 on the "crowded chessboard." I believe the above solution  	
contains the maximum number of pieces, but possibly some ingenious			
reader may succeed in getting in another knight.	  
	 	
			
307.--THE COLOURED COUNTERS.  	
 		
The counters may be arranged in this order:-- 	 
 		
    R1,  B2,  Y3,  O4,  GS.	  
    Y4,  O5,  G1,  R2,  B3.	  
    G2,  R3,  B4,  Y5,  O1.		 
    B5,  Y1,  O2,  G3,  R4.  	
    O3,  G4,  R5,  B1,  Y2.  	
	  
 	 
308.--THE GENTLE ART OF STAMP-LICKING.  	
	  
The following arrangement shows how sixteen stamps may be stuck on the	  
card, under the conditions, of a total value of fifty pence, or 4s. 	 
2d.:--			
	 	
[Illustration]   
		 
If, after placing the four 5d. stamps, the reader is tempted to place	 	
four 4d. stamps also, he can afterwards only place two of each of the	 	
three other denominations, thus losing two spaces and counting no more	  
than forty-eight pence, or 4s. This is the pitfall that was hinted at.			
(Compare with No. 43, _Canterbury Puzzles_.)	 	
	  
	  
309.--THE FORTY-NINE COUNTERS. 		
 	 
The counters may be arranged in this order:--   
	 	
    A1,  B2,  C3,  D4,  E5,  F6,  G7. 	 
    F4,  G5,  A6,  B7,  C1,  D2,  E3.	 	
    D7,  E1,  F2,  G3,  A4,  B5,  C6.	  
    B3,  C4,  D5,  E6,  F7,  G1,  A2.			
    G6,  A7,  B1,  C2,  D3,  E4,  F5.		 
    E2,  F3,  G4,  A5,  B6,  C7,  D1.  	
    C5,  D6,  E7,  F1,  G2,  A3,  B4.	  
	  
		 
310.--THE THREE SHEEP.	 	
  	
The number of different ways in which the three sheep may be placed so 	 
that every pen shall always be either occupied or in line with at least 	 
one sheep is forty-seven.  	
			
The following table, if used with the key in Diagram 1, will enable the	 	
reader to place them in all these ways:-- 		
			
    +------------+---------------------------+----------+ 		
    |            |                           |  No. of  | 	 
    | Two Sheep. |       Third Sheep.        |   Ways.  | 		
    +------------+---------------------------+----------+  	
    | A and B    | C, E, G, K, L, N, or P    |    7     |	  
    | A and C    | I, J, K, or O             |    4     |	  
    | A and D    | M, N, or J                |    3     |  	
    | A and F    | J, K, L, or P             |    4     |	 	
    | A and G    | H, J, K, N, O, or P       |    6     |	  
    | A and H    | K, L, N, or O             |    4     |	 	
    | A and O    | K or L                    |    2     |		 
    | B and C    | N                         |    1     |	 	
    | B and E    | F, H, K, or L             |    4     |  	
    | B and F    | G, J, N, or O             |    4     |	  
    | B and G    | K, L, or N                |    3     |	 	
    | B and H    | J or N                    |    2     |  	
    | B and J    | K or L                    |    2     | 		
    | F and G    | J                         |    1     |   
    |            |                           |   ----   |		 
    |            |                           |    47    |		 
    +------------+---------------------------+----------+   
	  
This, of course, means that if you place sheep in the pens marked A and  	
B, then there are seven different pens in which you may place the third	 	
sheep, giving seven different solutions. It was understood that	  
reversals and reflections do not count as different.		 
			
If one pen at least is to be _not_ in line with a sheep, there would be  	
thirty solutions to that problem. If we counted all the reversals and  	
reflections of these 47 and 30 cases respectively as different, their	 	
total would be 560, which is the number of different ways in which the		 
sheep may be placed in three pens without any conditions. I will remark	 	
that there are three ways in which two sheep may be placed so that every  	
pen is occupied or in line, as in Diagrams 2, 3, and 4, but in every	 	
case each sheep is in line with its companion. There are only two ways 		
in which three sheep may be so placed that every pen shall be occupied 	 
or in line, but no sheep in line with another. These I show in Diagrams   
5 and 6. Finally, there is only one way in which three sheep may be		 
placed so that at least one pen shall not be in line with a sheep and 		
yet no sheep in line with another. Place the sheep in C, E, L. This is			
practically all there is to be said on this pleasant pastoral subject. 	 
 	 
[Illustration]		 
	  
		 
311.--THE FIVE DOGS PUZZLE.	 	
 	 
The diagrams show four fundamentally different solutions. In the case of  	
A we can reverse the order, so that the single dog is in the bottom row   
and the other four shifted up two squares. Also we may use the next 	 
column to the right and both of the two central horizontal rows. Thus A		 
gives 8 solutions. Then B may be reversed and placed in either diagonal, 	 
giving 4 solutions. Similarly C will give 4 solutions. The line in D	 	
being symmetrical, its reversal will not be different, but it may be		 
disposed in 4 different directions. We thus have in all 20 different	 	
solutions.  	
  	
[Illustration]	  
		 
	 	
312.--THE FIVE CRESCENTS OF BYZANTIUM.		 
	  
[Illustration]	  
  	
If that ancient architect had arranged his five crescent tiles in the	  
manner shown in the following diagram, every tile would have been 		
watched over by, or in a line with, at least one crescent, and space 		
would have been reserved for a perfectly square carpet equal in area to  	
exactly half of the pavement. It is a very curious fact that, although 	 
there are two or three solutions allowing a carpet to be laid down	 	
within the conditions so as to cover an area of nearly twenty-nine of	 	
the tiles, this is the only possible solution giving exactly half the 		
area of the pavement, which is the largest space obtainable.   
	  
		 
313.--QUEENS AND BISHOP PUZZLE.	 	
 	 
[Illustration: FIG. 1.]	  
	  
[Illustration: FIG. 2.] 		
 		
The bishop is on the square originally occupied by the rook, and the	 	
four queens are so placed that every square is either occupied or 	 
attacked by a piece. (Fig. 1.) 	 
   
I pointed out in 1899 that if four queens are placed as shown in the	  
diagram (Fig. 2), then the fifth queen may be placed on any one of the			
twelve squares marked a, b, c, d, and e; or a rook on the two squares, 		
c; or a bishop on the eight squares, a, b, and e; or a pawn on the 	 
square b; or a king on the four squares, b, c, and e. The only known	  
arrangement for four queens and a knight is that given by Mr. J. Wallis 	 
in _The Strand Magazine_ for August 1908, here reproduced. (Fig. 3.) 	 
			
[Illustration: FIG. 3.]	 	
	 	
I have recorded a large number of solutions with four queens and a rook,	 	
or bishop, but the only arrangement, I believe, with three queens and   
two rooks in which all the pieces are guarded is that of which I give an	  
illustration (Fig. 4), first published by Dr. C. Planck. But I have		 
since found the accompanying solution with three queens, a rook, and a  	
bishop, though the pieces do not protect one another. (Fig. 5.)   
	  
[Illustration: FIG. 4.]			
 		
[Illustration: FIG. 5.]  	
 	 
 	 
314.--THE SOUTHERN CROSS.  	
 	 
My readers have been so familiarized with the fact that it requires at	 	
least five planets to attack every one of a square arrangement of 	 
sixty-four stars that many of them have, perhaps, got to believe that a  	
larger square arrangement of stars must need an increase of planets. It 	 
was to correct this possible error of reasoning, and so warn readers	 	
against another of those numerous little pitfalls in the world of 	 
puzzledom, that I devised this new stellar problem. Let me then state at 	 
once that, in the case of a square arrangement of eighty one stars,		 
there are several ways of placing five planets so that every star shall	 	
be in line with at least one planet vertically, horizontally, or 	 
diagonally. Here is the solution to the "Southern Cross": --	 	
 		
It will be remembered that I said that the five planets in their new	  
positions "will, of course, obscure five other stars in place of those 	 
at present covered." This was to exclude an easier solution in which  	
only four planets need be moved.   
	  
 	 
315.--THE HAT-PEG PUZZLE.	 	
	  
The moves will be made quite clear by a reference to the diagrams, which 		
show the position on the board after each of the four moves. The darts		 
indicate the successive removals that have been made. It will be seen		 
that at every stage all the squares are either attacked or occupied, and 	 
that after the fourth move no queen attacks any other. In the case of	 	
the last move the queen in the top row might also have been moved one 	 
square farther to the left. This is, I believe, the only solution to the  	
puzzle.  	
 		
[Illustration: 1] 		
  	
[Illustration: 2]	 	
	  
[Illustration: 3] 	 
 		
[Illustration: 4]	  
	  
		 
316.--THE AMAZONS. 	 
	 	
It will be seen that only three queens have been removed from their		 
positions on the edge of the board, and that, as a consequence, eleven 	 
squares (indicated by the black dots) are left unattacked by any queen.  	
I will hazard the statement that eight queens cannot be placed on the 		
chessboard so as to leave more than eleven squares unattacked. It is 		
true that we have no rigid proof of this yet, but I have entirely			
convinced myself of the truth of the statement. There are at least five  	
different ways of arranging the queens so as to leave eleven squares			
unattacked.	  
  	
[Illustration] 		
	  
	  
317.--A PUZZLE WITH PAWNS.		 
			
Sixteen pawns may be placed so that no three shall be in a straight line	 	
in any possible direction, as in the diagram. We regard, as the	 	
conditions required, the pawns as mere points on a plane.			
  	
[Illustration]  	
	  
318.--LION-HUNTING. 	 
			
There are 6,480 ways of placing the man and the lion, if there are no		 
restrictions whatever except that they must be on different spots. This			
is obvious, because the man may be placed on any one of the 81 spots,	 	
and in every case there are 80 spots remaining for the lion; therefore 		
81 x 80 = 6,480. Now, if we deduct the number of ways in which the lion	  
and the man may be placed on the same path, the result must be the 		
number of ways in which they will not be on the same path. The number of 	 
ways in which they may be in line is found without much difficulty to be			
816. Consequently, 6,480 - 816 = 5,664, the required answer. 	 
	  
The general solution is this: 1/3n(n - 1)(3n squared - n + 2). This is, of		 
course, equivalent to saying that if we call the number of squares on	 	
the side of a "chessboard" n, then the formula shows the number of	  
ways in which two bishops may be placed without attacking one another. 		
Only in this case we must divide by two, because the two bishops have no		 
distinct individuality, and cannot produce a different solution by mere		 
exchange of places.	  
	 	
	 	
319.--THE KNIGHT-GUARDS. 		
 		
[Illustration: DIAGRAM 1.]		 
 	 
[Illustration: DIAGRAM 2.] 		
   
The smallest possible number of knights with which this puzzle can be	 	
solved is fourteen. 		
 		
It has sometimes been assumed that there are a great many different 	 
solutions. As a matter of fact, there are only three arrangements--not 		
counting mere reversals and reflections as different. Curiously enough, 	 
nobody seems ever to have hit on the following simple proof, or to have		 
thought of dealing with the black and the white squares separately.   
	  
[Illustration: DIAGRAM 3.] 		
  	
[Illustration: DIAGRAM 4.]   
		 
[Illustration: DIAGRAM 5.] 		
  	
Seven knights can be placed on the board on white squares so as to			
attack every black square in two ways only. These are shown in Diagrams	  
1 and 2. Note that three knights occupy the same position in both		 
arrangements. It is therefore clear that if we turn the board so that a	 	
black square shall be in the top left-hand corner instead of a white,	  
and place the knights in exactly the same positions, we shall have two	  
similar ways of attacking all the white squares. I will assume the 	 
reader has made the two last described diagrams on transparent paper,	  
and marked them _1a_ and _2a_. Now, by placing the transparent Diagram		 
_1a_ over 1 you will be able to obtain the solution in Diagram 3, by	 	
placing _2a_ over 2 you will get Diagram 4, and by placing _2a_ over 1	  
you will get Diagram 5. You may now try all possible combinations of  	
those two pairs of diagrams, but you will only get the three 		
arrangements I have given, or their reversals and reflections. Therefore 	 
these three solutions are all that exist. 	 
		 
		 
320.--THE ROOK'S TOUR.	 	
 	 
[Illustration] 		
 		
The only possible minimum solutions are shown in the two diagrams, where		 
it will be seen that only sixteen moves are required to perform the		 
feat. Most people find it difficult to reduce the number of moves below	 	
seventeen*. 	 
		 
[Illustration: THE ROOK'S TOUR.] 	 
	 	
   
321.--THE ROOK'S JOURNEY.	  
			
[Illustration]   
			
I show the route in the diagram. It will be seen that the tenth move		 
lands us at the square marked "10," and that the last move, the 		
twenty-first, brings us to a halt on square "21."	 	
   
 		
322.--THE LANGUISHING MAIDEN.		 
 	 
The dotted line shows the route in twenty-two straight paths by which	 	
the knight may rescue the maiden. It is necessary, after entering the	 	
first cell, immediately to return before entering another. Otherwise a  	
solution would not be possible. (See "The Grand Tour," p. 200.)	 	
 	 
			
323.--A DUNGEON PUZZLE.		 
  	
If the prisoner takes the route shown in the diagram--where for	  
clearness the doorways are omitted--he will succeed in visiting every		 
cell once, and only once, in as many as fifty-seven straight lines. No  	
rook's path over the chessboard can exceed this number of moves.	 	
  	
[Illustration: THE LANGUISHING MAIDEN]	  
		 
[Illustration: A DUNGEON PUZZLE.] 		
 		
		 
324.--THE LION AND THE MAN. 	 
			
First of all, the fewest possible straight lines in each case are  	
twenty-two, and in order that no cell may be visited twice it is   
absolutely necessary that each should pass into one cell and then 	 
immediately "visit" the one from which he started, afterwards proceeding 	 
by way of the second available cell. In the following diagram the man's  	
route is indicated by the unbroken lines, and the lion's by the dotted		 
lines. It will be found, if the two routes are followed cell by cell 	 
with two pencil points, that the lion and the man never meet. But there  	
was one little point that ought not to be overlooked--"they occasionally 		
got glimpses of one another." Now, if we take one route for the man and   
merely reverse it for the lion, we invariably find that, going at the		 
same speed, they never get a glimpse of one another. But in our diagram		 
it will be found that the man and the lion are in the cells marked A at			
the same moment, and may see one another through the open doorways;		 
while the same happens when they are in the two cells marked B, the  	
upper letters indicating the man and the lower the lion. In the first			
case the lion goes straight for the man, while the man appears to  	
attempt to get in the rear of the lion; in the second case it looks 	 
suspiciously like running away from one another!			
  	
[Illustration]	 	
	  			  	    	 		 		 		 	    		 	 	 	 	 	    		 	 	  					 	    	 		 	 		 		 				  			 		 				 		  			 			   				 			   	  	   		    	 		   		 		    	 		   					  	  			 	 	  		   	   	   		  	  	 	 		   					  	  	 		  		 		 	  	 		    	 		   		  	 				  				 	 		  	 		 	  			  	 	 	   	  	 	  		  	 	 	  	    	    	 		 		 				   	  			   		 	   			 	 				  	  	 	 		  		 	 	  	    	    		 	 		 				  		   	 	 	 	 		    	 				 	 	